docs: ray distributed debugger (#45913)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/ray-observability/ray-distributed-debugger.rst

========================

The Ray Distributed Debugger is a VS Code extension that streamlines the debugging process with an interactive debugging experience. The Ray Debugger enables you to:

- **Break into remote tasks**: Set a breakpoint in any remote task. A breakpoint pauses execution and allows you to connect with VS Code for debugging.
- **Post-mortem debugging**: When Ray tasks fail with unhandled exceptions, Ray automatically freezes the failing task and waits for the Ray Debugger to attach, allowing you to inspect the state of the program at the time of the error.

Ray Distributed Debugger abstracts the complexities of debugging distributed systems for you to debug Ray applications more efficiently, saving time and effort in the development workflow.

Demo
====

.. raw:: html

    <div style="position: relative; height: 0; overflow: hidden; max-width: 100%; height: auto;">
        <iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/EiGHHUXL0oI" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>
    </div>

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Get started

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Download the extension
```

> ===========

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Click `here <https://www.anyscale.com/blog/ray-distributed-debugger?utm_source=ray_docs&utm_medium=docs&utm_campaign=promotion#download-for-free>`_ to download the Ray Debugger extension for free.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Download <https://www.anyscale.com/blog/ray-distributed-debugger?utm_source=ray_docs&utm_medium=docs&utm_campaign=promotion#download-for-free>`_ the Ray Debugger extension.
```

> Setup environment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set up the environment
```

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

Create a new virtual environment and install dependencies.

.. testcode::
    :skipif: True

    conda create -n myenv python=3.9
    conda activate myenv
    pip install "ray[default]" debugpy

Start a Ray cluster
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Run `ray start --head` to start a Ray Cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run `ray start --head` to start a Ray cluster.
```

Register the cluster
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Add the Ray cluster `IP:PORT` to the cluster list. The default `IP:PORT` is `127.0.0.1:8265`, and you can change it when starting a new cluster. Make sure your current machine can access the IP and port.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Find and click the Ray extension in the VS Code left side nav. Add the Ray cluster `IP:PORT` to the cluster list. The default `IP:PORT` is `127.0.0.1:8265`. You can change it when you start the cluster. Make sure your current machine can access the IP and port.
```

.. image:: ./images/register-cluster.gif
    :align: center

Create a Ray task
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Create a file `job.py` with the following snippet. Add the `RAY_DEBUG` environment variable to enable Ray Debugger and add `breakpoint()` in the Ray task.

.. literalinclude:: ./doc_code/ray-distributed-debugger.py
    :language: python

Run your Ray app 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Start running your Ray app.

.. code-block:: bash

    python job.py

> Attach to a paused task

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Attach to the paused task
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> When debugger hits a breakpoint

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the debugger hits a breakpoint:
```

- The task enters a paused state.
- The terminal clearly indicates when the debugger pauses a task and waits for the debugger to attach.
- The paused task is listed in the Ray Debugger extension.

> - Click on the paused task to attach the VS Code debugger.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Click the play icon next to the name of the paused task to attach the VS Code debugger.
```

.. image:: ./images/attach-paused-task.gif
    :align: center

> Use the VS Code debugger

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Start debugging
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Debug your Ray app just as you would when developing locally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Debug your Ray app as you would when developing locally.
```

Post-mortem debugging
=====================

Use post-mortem debugging when Ray tasks encounter unhandled exceptions. In such cases, Ray automatically freezes the failing task, awaiting attachment by the Ray Debugger. This feature allows you to thoroughly investigate and inspect the program's state at the time of the error.

Run a Ray task raised exception
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Run the same `job.py` file with an additional argument to raise an exception.
    
.. code-block:: bash

    python job.py raise-exception

> Attach to paused task

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Attach to the paused task
```

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

When the app throws an exception:

- The debugger freezes the task.

> - The terminal clearly indicates when the debugger pauses a task is paused and waits for the debugger to attach.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The terminal clearly indicates when the debugger pauses a task and waits for the debugger to attach.
```

- The paused task is listed in the Ray Debugger extension.
- Click the play icon next to the name of the paused task to attach the debugger and start debugging. 

.. image:: ./images/post-moretem.gif
    :align: center

> Use the VS Code debugger

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Start debugging
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Debug your Ray app just as you would when developing locally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Debug your Ray app as you would when developing locally.
```

> Feedback

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Share feedback
```

> ========

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==============
```

Ray Distributed Debugger
========================

The Ray Distributed Debugger is a VS Code extension that streamlines the debugging process with an interactive debugging experience. The Ray Debugger enables you to:

- **Break into remote tasks**: Set a breakpoint in any remote task. A breakpoint pauses execution and allows you to connect with VS Code for debugging.
- **Post-mortem debugging**: When Ray tasks fail with unhandled exceptions, Ray automatically freezes the failing task and waits for the Ray Debugger to attach, allowing you to inspect the state of the program at the time of the error.

Ray Distributed Debugger abstracts the complexities of debugging distributed systems for you to debug Ray applications more efficiently, saving time and effort in the development workflow.

.. raw:: html

    <div style="position: relative; height: 0; overflow: hidden; max-width: 100%; height: auto;">
        <iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/EiGHHUXL0oI" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>
    </div>

> Download the extension

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Reviewer: Missed this extraneous text last time.

Ray Distributed Debugger
========================

The Ray Distributed Debugger is a VS Code extension that streamlines the debugging process with an interactive debugging experience. The Ray Debugger enables you to:

- **Break into remote tasks**: Set a breakpoint in any remote task. A breakpoint pauses execution and allows you to connect with VS Code for debugging.
- **Post-mortem debugging**: When Ray tasks fail with unhandled exceptions, Ray automatically freezes the failing task and waits for the Ray Debugger to attach, allowing you to inspect the state of the program at the time of the error.

Ray Distributed Debugger abstracts the complexities of debugging distributed systems for you to debug Ray applications more efficiently, saving time and effort in the development workflow.

> Demo

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: Let's remove this heading. It's not necessary.

> ====

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Run a Ray task raised exception
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Run the same `job.py` file with an additional argument to raise an exception.
    
.. code-block:: bash

    python job.py raise-exception

Attach to the paused task
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When the app throws an exception:

- The debugger freezes the task.
- The terminal clearly indicates when the debugger pauses a task and waits for the debugger to attach.
- The paused task is listed in the Ray Debugger extension.
- Click the play icon next to the name of the paused task to attach the debugger and start debugging. 

.. image:: ./images/post-moretem.gif
    :align: center

Start debugging
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Debug your Ray app as you would when developing locally.

Share feedback
==============

Join the `#ray-debugger <https://ray-distributed.slack.com/archives/C073MPGLAC9>`_ channel on the Ray Slack channel to get help.

Next steps
==========

> For guidance on debugging distributed apps in Ray, see :doc:`General debugging <./user-guides/debug-apps/general-debugging>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For guidance on debugging distributed apps in Ray, see :doc:`General debugging <./user-guides/debug-apps/general-debugging>`.
```

> For tips on using the Ray debugger, see :doc:`Ray debugging <./user-guides/debug-apps/ray-debugging>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For tips on using the Ray debugger, see :doc:`Ray debugging <./user-guides/debug-apps/ray-debugging>`.
```

            return x

        if len(sys.argv) == 1:
            ray.get(my_task.remote(10))
        else:
            ray.get(post_mortem.remote(10)) 

- **Setup Debugger Local Folder**: Ray Debugger needs to know the absolute path to the folder you submitted `job.py`. Use pwd command to get the submission path, and set the cluster's local folder to the path. For each cluster, you can set the local folder by clicking on the ⚙️ icon on the cluster item.

.. image:: ./images/setup-debugger.gif
    :align: center

- **Run Your Ray Application**: Start running your Ray application.

    .. code-block:: bash

        python job.py

- **Attach to Paused Tasks**:
  - The task will enter a paused state once the breakpoint is hit.
  - The terminal will clearly indicate when a task is paused and waiting for the debugger to attach.
  - The paused tasks will be listed in the Ray Debugger extension.
  - Click on a paused task to attach the VSCode debugger.

.. image:: ./images/attach-paused-task.gif
    :align: center

- **Use the VSCode Debugger**: Debug your Ray application just as you would when developing locally.

Post-Mortem Debugging
=====================

> Continuing from the previous section, let's delve into Post-Mortem debugging. This feature becomes essential when Ray tasks encounter unhandled exceptions. In such cases, Ray automatically freezes the failing task, awaiting attachment by the Ray Debugger. This functionality empowers you to thoroughly investigate and inspect the program's state at the time of the error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use post-mortem debugging when Ray tasks encounter unhandled exceptions. In such cases, Ray automatically freezes the failing task, awaiting attachment by the Ray Debugger. This functionality allows you to thoroughly investigate and inspect the program's state at the time of the error.
```

> - **Run a Ray Task Raised Exception**: Run the same `job.py` created above with an additional argument raise-exception.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run a Ray Task Raised Exception
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
 
Run the same `job.py` created above with an additional argument raise-exception.
```

    .. code-block:: bash

        python job.py raise-exception

> - **Attach to Paused Tasks**:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Attach to a paused task
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

```

>   - The task will be frozen once the exception is thrown.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the app throws an exception:

  - The debugger freezes the task.
```

>   - The terminal will clearly indicate when a task is paused and waiting for the debugger to attach.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - The terminal clearly indicates when the debugger pauses a task is paused and waits for the debugger to attach.
```

>   - The paused tasks will be listed in the Ray Debugger extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - The paused task is listed in the Ray Debugger extension.
```

>   - Click on a paused task to attach the VSCode debugger.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - You can click on a paused task to attach the VS Code debugger.
```

.. image:: ./images/post-moretem.gif
    :align: center

> - **Use the VSCode Debugger**: Debug your Ray application just as you would when developing locally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the VSCode Debugger
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Debug your Ray app just as you would when developing locally.
```

Feedback
=========

> Join `#ray-debugger <https://ray-distributed.slack.com/archives/C073MPGLAC9>`_ channel on the Ray slack channel to get help

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Join the `#ray-debugger <https://ray-distributed.slack.com/archives/C073MPGLAC9>`_ channel on the Ray Slack channel to get help
```
